The outbreak of the Corona virus has led to unprecedented measures
in education. From March 16, all schools in the Netherlands are closed,
and children must keep up with their schoolwork from home. Parents are
expected to take a crucial role in this “homeschooling”: they are primar-
ily responsible for ensuring that their children follow the curriculum. In
this article I report the first results of a module in the LISS Panel that
was designed to map how parents school their children in primary and
secondary education. Data on a nationally representative sample of 1,318
children in primary and secondary education were gathered in April. The
results show marked differences between social groups. Whereas all parents
find it important that their children keep up with the schoolwork, children
from advantaged backgrounds receive much more parental support and have
more resources (¢.g., own computer) to study from home. Differences in
parental support are driven by the ability to help: parents with a higher
education degree feels themselves much capable to help their children with
schoolwork than lower educated parents. Parents also report that schools
provide more extensive distant schooling for children in the academic track
in secondary education (vwo) than for children in the pre-vocational track
umbo. Finally, there is a clear gender gap: parents feel much more capable
to support their daughters than their sons. These initial findings provide
first indications that the school shutdown in the Netherlands is likely to
have strong effects on the inequality in educational opportunities.

*The research in this article has been supported by an ODISSEI grant to collect
data during the Covid-19 crisis. I would like to thank Joost Leenen for his help with
programming the survey and Sara Geven and Dieuwke Zwier for their comments on the
initial version of the survey.

1 Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented measures in education. From
March 16, all schools in the Netherlands are closed, and children must keep up
with their schoolwork from home. Parents are expected to take a crucial role
in this “homeschooling”: they are primarily responsible for ensuring that their
children follow the curriculum. Within the LISS panel I have gathered data
to investigate how parents (differently) deal with homeschooling. A worry is
that the long period of exposure to homeschooling is likely to increase socio-
economic inequalities in education, as children from disadvantaged families have
less resources to study and less access to help when studying from home. To
what extent do children from different socio-economic backgrounds get the same
opportunities to learn during the school shutdown?

A key finding in sociology, educational sciences, and economics is that chil-
dren from disadvantaged families have fewer opportunities in education than chil-
dren from a higher socio-economic background (Breen and Jonsson, 2005) In the
Netherlands these inequalities are reported too: the Dutch Educational Inspec-
torate repeatedly reported large gaps in educational outcomes between children
of higher and lower educated parents (Inspectie van het Onderwijs, 2017). One
of the key reasons why children that grow up in advantaged families have bet-
ter opportunities is because they have more resources to learn (Bourdieu, 1973).
Partly these resources are material, but partly these resources are immaterial and
closely related to parental involvement in schooling.

First, some families lack important educational resources (e.g., computers,
software) that are required for doing schoolwork. This problem of a lack of
material resources might be even more urgent in a situation where all school-going
children are at home, and one computer within the family might not be sufficient.
There might also be variation in the living space per household member, which
might impede the possibility for quiet study. This lack of material resources that
can be crucial for doing schoolwork from home are clustered in disadvantaged
families, where income is low (Angus et al., 2004). Another resource that might
be scarcer among some families is time. Some children grow up in a household
with two caretakers, others with just one. There is a clear socio-economic gradient
in the time that parents can spend with their children

Second, parental involvement in schoolwork is known to have a strong effect
on educational outcomes. When parents are more involved with schoolwork, cog-
nitive test scores are found to be higher, resulting in higher levels of educational
attainment (Boonk et al., 2018). Similar results are found for the Netherlands
(Driessen et al., 2005).+

Socio-economic gaps in parental involvement are likely to increase existing in-
equalities in education too. Lower-educated parents are, on average, less capable

‘Tt is important to take into account that parental involvement is partly driven by the
demand: meaning that lower performing children will receive more support because they need
it (see also (Driessen et al., 2005)). However, this does not explain socio-economic gaps in
parental involvement.

to provide adequate help in their children’s schooling (Lee and Bowen, 2006).
Higher educated parents, in contrast, try to foster and enhance their children’s
talents by offering them ample opportunities to learn (Lareau, 2011). They are
very aware of the importance of education to get ahead in society, and actively
try to advance their children’s schooling careers (Calarco, 2018; Lareau, 2011).
When it comes to help with schoolwork, higher-educated parents are both more
able to help out, but also believe that more help is needed. Both mechanisms
will increase existing inequalities in education.

In a normal situation, this strong variation in opportunities that children get
at home is at least partly mitigated by school: everyone can learn during school
times. Schools are thereby thought to be highly important for creating equal
opportunities in society. However, because of the Covid-19 outbreak schools are
closed, and parents have become primarily responsible for the learning of their
children. Given the strong socio-economic gradient that is found in resources
at home, this is likely to increase socio-economic gaps in education. During
the school shutdown, children from different backgrounds get widely different
opportunities to learn.

In the Netherlands the full school shutdown will last for 8 weeks for children
in primary school. After this, children will return to primary schools for half of
the time; the remaining schoolwork is expected to be done at home. Secondary
schools in the Netherlands will remain closed, with the intention to (partially)
re-open them on June 1, 2020. While this period might seem like a short period,
existing research finds that even short breaks are likely to increase inequalities.
Alexander et al. (2001) show that in the United States socio-economic inequal-
ities increase during the 2-3 month summer break. Children from advantaged
backgrounds get ample opportunities to develop, whereas this is not the case for
children from disadvantaged families. This “summer setback” is has lasting ef-
fects on educational performance in, for example, mathematics (Alexander et al.,
2007).

The school shutdown driven by the Covid-19 pandemic has a large impact on
how children learn. In order to map this, I have surveyed a representative sample
of Dutch parents about their school-going children using the LISS-Panel. The
goal of the data collection is twofold. First, to describe (social inequalities in)
how parents support their children with schooling during the school shutdown.
Second, to track the short- and long-term consequences of (social inequality) in
homeschooling. In this brief article I will describe preliminary results regarding
the first question.

2 Data

Data for the survey were collected from April 13 to April 28 within the LISS
(Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social sciences) Panel. The LISS panel
consists of 4,500 households, containing about 7,000 individuals. LISS collects
data using online questionnaires. The panel consists of households from a true
probability sample of households drawn from the Dutch population registers by

Statistics Netherlands. Whenever a household wanted to participate but was not
able because they lacked a computer or internet connection, LISS provided them
with it. Every month, members of the LISS Panel complete online questionnaires
of about 15 to 30 minutes in total. Panel members are remunerated for each
completed questionnaire. A longitudinal survey is fielded in the panel every year,
covering a large variety of domains including work, education, income, housing,
time use, political views, values and personality. In addition to this LISS Core
Study, many separate modules are fielded to collect scientific data for scholars
from widely different disciplines, from sociology to medical sciences.

2.1 Sample

For the current LISS module on homeschooling during the school shutdown, only
panel members with children in the school-going ages for primary and secondary
education (4-18 years old) were targeted. If two caretakers? were living in the
same household, both had the opportunity to fill in the survey. In total 1,212
panel members met the criteria, 898 filled in the questionnaire, which means a
response rate of 74%. The final analytic sample contains information from 768
parents: 130 parents did have children in the school going age, but these children
were not enrolled in secondary school anymore (but in an upper secondary voca-
tional course mbo or tertiary vocational education hbo). The LISS Panel does not
provide weights, which means that selective non-response cannot be accounted
for.

All parents were asked to provide information on all of their children. The
final sample therefore contains information on 1,318 children: 705 in primary
school, 613 in secondary school. Data are analyzed on the level of the child,
meaning that the final sample size of the data is the total number of children.

2.2 Variables

The module addressed different themes. First, parents asked about what schools
provided them to continue schoolwork at home. Eight items were included, ask-
ing parents to rank whether, for example, schools provided them with sufficient
information to start homeschooling, or whether children and parents have regular
contact with the teacher. All items were measured on a five point Likert-scale.

A second block of items asks parents about how they support their children
with their schoolwork. This contains, for example, items on whether parents
provide help, whether children organize their own schoolwork, whether there is a
clear structure when working on school at home. It also asks parents to indicate
the extent of help they believe their child requires, and whether they feel capable
to provide this support. Again respondents could score all statements from 1
(Does not apply at all) to 5 (Applies completely). The module also asks parents
how much time their children spend on their schoolwork in hours.

? This can also be one biological parent and one step-parent.

Phrased differently; about 70% of the highly educated parents answers that
they agree or fully agree with the statement that they help their children with
their homework, whereas this is only 50% of parents with a low level of education.
Partly this is driven by the fact that lower educated parents feels less capable to
help their primary school children. About 63% of them feels capable to help their
childrent compared to 80% of the university-educated parents. Figure 2 shows
that homeschooling during the Covid-19 pandemic is very different for children
that grow up with highly educated parents and children that grow up with parents
with low education.

3.1.3 Material resources

Figure 3 shows how material resources are distributed across children in primary
school. The vast majority of children in primary school has their own bedroom
(91%), a smaller share has their own workspace (68%). About 66% of children in
primary school have a laptop or tablet for their own to do their schoolwork on.
This means that about one third does not have their own device, but it should be
noted that in primary education having a device is not required by the schools.
About 80% of the parents report that an tablet or computer is necessary to do
the schoolwork at home.

While most children have material resources, there is a clear pattern among
those who do not have resources. Education does not seem to explain (a lack of)
material resources. However, the results do indicate that parents that score high

4Scoring a 4 or 5 on the 5 point-scale question in Figure 1.

indicates that most parents answer that they got information from schools after
the shutdown. There is a bit more variation in the extent to which teachers
contacted students. Even more variation can be found when we look at the extent
to which parents perceive the communication of schools to be clear. Finally, there
is clear variation in the extent to which teachers check the homework of students
in primary school. I do not find stark differences in the extent to which parents
with different levels of education report differences between schools-there are
some indications that schools have relatively more contact with lower-educated
parents, but these differences are small and not significantly different from zero.

Figure 1: Parent involvement (primary education)

3.1.2 Parental involvement

Figure 1 shows the distribution of answers to parental involvement. A large share
of the parents do not help their children with their schoolwork (upper left panel),
but the majority does check whether children have done their schoolwork. Most
parents feel capable to help their children in primary school. Almost all parents
argue that they find it important that their children keep up with schoolwork
during this period.

The differences in parental involvement are partly explained by the educa-
tional level of parents. Figure 2 shows the gap between parents with a university
degree and parents with a secondary school degree at most. There is a clear
educational gradient: higher educated parents are more involved in helping their
offspring with their schoolwork and they also feel more capable to do this. These
gaps are big, in both cases around .4sd of the variable.

Figure 4 shows the effect of a lsd increase on the perceived poverty scale.
This effect is about 6 percentage points when it comes to computers, meaning
that for each standard deviation increase on the poverty scale children are 6
percentage points less likely to own their own computer or laptop. Similar effect
sizes are found for having an own workspace or bedroom, although the effect
of workspace does not reach conventional levels of statistical significance. Not

2.3. Methods

The main goal of this paper is to summarize the first findings from the data
collection. This means that I will rely mostly on simple description. There
are, however, two methodological considerations. First, children are the unit of
analysis but data was gathered at the parental level. Since children are clustered
within parents and households, standard errors on the estimates are calculated
taking this into account. Second, in primary education the age of the child has a
strong effect on the parental support: older children require more support. Since
the Dutch educational system is highly tracked, in secondary education a similar
problem occurs as children in the academic track (vwo) require different support
than children in the track that leads to upper secondary vocational education
(umbo). For this reason the estimates of the gaps in homeschooling are obtained
from simple regression models that control for these factors.

 

3 Results

Below the first main findings are summarized. Please note that this is not an
exhaustive overview of all variables that were collected, but a first summary of
key findings.

3.1 Primary education

3.1.1 School involvement

In primary education there is variation in how schools dealt with the school
shutdown, but there are very little structural differences across groups. Figure B1

A third block of questions contains information on the material resources that
are available at home. Parents are asked whether children have their own device
(computer, tablet) to use for their schoolwork, whether children have their own
bedroom, and whether children have a quiet place to study. Finally, parents
are asked whether they have bought extra software to aid their children with
schoolwork or whether children are now participating in extra (online) tutoring
classes. All these items are measured on a binary scale (yes or no).

In the module I also gathered information on the household. First, it tries
to map the atmosphere at home. Six items measure whether there are tensions,
whether there is a lot of fighting, and whether the day is clearly structured.
Second, we measure the perceived poverty of a household using four items, by
asking parents whether they can go on multiple holidays every year, or whether
there is enough money to undertake fun activities with the family. These four
items are transformed in a “perceived poverty”-scale, with an Cronbach’s a of .74.
An overview of all (Dutch) questions in this LISS Module can be found in the
Appendix.

From the LISS Core module we include several other characteristics of panel
members (and their partners). Final educational attainment of the parents is
measured in four categories: low (primary school, only secondary school ( vmbo,
havo, vwo)), upper secondary vocational (mbo), tertiary vocational (hbo), or uni-
y (wo). When mapping whether there are socio-economic inequalities in
homeschooling, I will mostly rely on the parents’ education to describe gaps*.
LISS also contains information on the language that is primarily spoken at home.
This variable is recoded into 0 (Dutch) and 1 (Any language other than Dutch).
Although the variable is not available for all parents in the module, we do include
it when estimating gaps.

Descriptive statistics of the data for the parents are shown in Table 1 and for
the children in Table 2.

  

   

 

Table 1: Descriptives of parents

Mean SD
Education level
Low -20
Mbo 33
Hbo 32
Wo 16
Number of school-going children 172 77
Perceived poverty (std.) 0 74
Partner in household 88
Speaks Dutch in house 96

’Compared to low educated parents, middle (mbo) and high (hbo, wo) educated parents
work much often in crucial occupations, and this might unevenly affect their possibility to
support their children with schoolwork. We cannot currently include this information, but if
anything, this will increase the predicted gaps.

surprisingly, differences in material resources are explained quite strongly by the
income of families. Children that grow up in families at the bottom of the income
distribution have least. access to resources that can improve learning from home.

3.2 Secondary education

3.2.1 School involvement

Similar to students in primary education, most parents in secondary education
obtained information from the school after the shutdown. Figure 5 also indicates
that most students have regular contact with their teachers; about 75% of the
parents agree or fully agree with this statement. There is more variation in the
extent to which parents believe the communication was clear (bottom left panel)
or whether teachers check the schoolwork of students in secondary education.

Figure 5: School involvement (secondary education)

These differences vary systematically across children from different backgrounds,
but in this case lower educated parents report more involvement of the school.
Figure 6 shows the predicted gaps between higher and lower educated parents.
This confirms the idea that during the Covid-19 pandemic schools reach out
more to students in disadvantaged families, and might also support them more
by checking their schoolwork more often. It is clear that in secondary education
the extent to which schools are involved in the schoolwork of their pupils is not
likely to increase inequality in education.

Large differences in school involvement are found between the educational
tracks in Dutch education. Figure 7 shows the gap between what schools offer to
students at the vmbo track (the track that leads to upper secondary vocational

Similar to family background, be it parental education or poverty, educational
inequalities between boys and girls are also likely to enlarge during the school
shutdown. Girls receive more help, parents feel more capable helping them, and
parents report that they like their schoolwork more.

4 Conclusion

The Covid-19 outbreak has led to school shutdowns around the world, thereby
making parents primarily responsible for the learning of their children. In April
data were collected on the homeschooling practices of parents in the Netherlands.
A specific goal of this data collection was to map how parents from different
socio-economic backgrounds provided different support with the schoolwork of
their children. The initial results provide strong evidence that there are large
gaps in how children have learned during the school shutdown.

In primary education, parents with a high educational background believe
that their children need more support with their schooling and thus also provide

Education gap (A High-Low) in sd

Information Contact Communication Check homework

Note. - Predicted gaps based on a regression model, controlling for the age of the child, a binary
indicator measuring whether the child worked from home, an indicator for school year, and a
dummy for the school track the child is in. Whiskers depict 95% confidence intervals. Standard
errors are clustered at the parent and household level.

education) and the academic vwo track. Parents report that their children in the
academic track are much more likely to have had digital classes than children in
the pre-vocational track—a gap of almost .5sd. Similarly, children in the academic
track much more often receive a structured educational programme, and their
schoolwork is checked more often. These findings are not explained by the fact
that children in the academic track go to school longer: in the models we control
for grade year, basically comparing differences for students in the same grade
year.

These gaps clearly indicate that the school shutdown did not only have effects
on children from different family backgrounds, but for children in different school
tracks too. Parents report that children in the pre-vocational track receive less
extensive support from their schools than children in the academic track.

3.2.2 Parental involvement

In line with primary school children, there is also variation in the extent to which
parents in secondary school support their children with schoolwork. Figure 8
depicts the distribution of four factors of parental involvement. In contrast to
primary education, in secondary education parents support their children far less.
Moreover, they are less likely to check the schoolwork of the children. There is
also more variation in the extent to which parents feel themselves capable to help
their children with schoolwork. About 25% does not feel themselves capable to


more support. Strikingly, even in primary education there is a large gap in the
extent to which parents feel themselves capable to support their children. The
first results also indicate some differences with respect to material resources, and
particularly families in poverty have more difficulties in providing resources that
might improve learning from home. Differences in material resources are found
for children in both primary and secondary education.

In secondary education there there is a very large gap in parental support
between children with higher and lower educated parents. About 75% of the
parents with academic education feel themselves capable to support their children
with their schoolwork, compared to only 40% of the lower educated parents.
Gender plays a role too: parents support their sons less, feel less capable of
supporting them, and report that boys enjoy doing their schoolwork much less
than girls. The school shutdown is thereby also likely to increase gender inequality
in education.

School involvement tends to be higher for children who have lower educated
parents. At the same time I find that schools offer children from the highest track
(vwo) a much more structured educational programme including digital classes
than children from the pre-vocational track (vmbo). This signals that the school
shutdown also affects educational levels in secondary education differently.

The first results from this data collection provides strong indications that
the school shutdown caused by the Covid-19 pandemic will increase existing in-
equalities in education. Children from disadvantaged families received much less
support from their parents, which is likely to have impeded their learning during
this period.

The largest gap, however, is in the extent to which parents feel capable to
help their children: a gap of almost .9sd. This gap is visualized in Figure 10.
It becomes clear that higher educated see themselves as much more capable to
help their children. About 75% of the parents with an academic education feels
themselves capable to help their children, compared to only 40% of the lower
educated parents. However,Figure 9 also makes clear that all parents find it
equally important that their children make their schoolwork. This indicates that
there are large disparities in the possibilities that parents have to help their
children during the school shutdown.

3.2.3 Material resources

Figure B2 shows the description of the material resources. Compared to primary
education, children in secondary education have much more access to material
resources. More than 90% of the parents reports that their children have their
own room, a quiet place to study, and a laptop or tablet they can use for their
schoolwork. This percentage is partly explained by the fact that 95% of the
parents reports that a laptop or tablet is necessary to do the schoolwork at home.

student scholar
